DECISION TO PROTECT PRIVACY IN
THE DIGITAL AGE, THE SUPREME
COURT RULED 9-TO-0 THAT POLICE
NEED A WARRANT TO SEARCH CELL
PHONES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY, MY
CONVERSATION WITH FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE AND FIRST
LADY, HILLARY CLINTON.
WE DISCUSS CRISES ABROAD,
POLITICS AT HOME, AND GET A
SURPRISING ANSWER TO THE
QUESTION ON MANY PEOPLE'S MINDS.
>> YOU HAVE TO BE A LITTLE BIT
CRAZY TO RUN FOR PRESIDENT, LET
ME JUST PUT IT LIKE THAT,
BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO BE SO
TOTALLY IMMERSED AND SO
CONVINCED THAT YOU CAN BRING
SOMETHING TO THAT OFFICE.
>> Woodruff: AND FROM GUATEMALA,
A LOOK AT EFFORTS TO SAVE
CHILDREN FROM MALNUTRITION AND
ITS LIFE-LONG EFFECTS, IN A
COUNTRY WHERE MANY FAMILIES
SURVIVE ON BEANS, AND LITTLE
ELSE.
>> IT'S A STAPLE MEAL HERE IN
THE PREDOMINANTLY MAYAN
HIGHLANDS OF GUATEMALA.
ONE CONTAINING SO FEW OF THE
VITAMINS AND MINERALS CHILDREN
NEED TO GROW PROPERLY THAT
ROUGHLY EIGHT IN TEN OF THEM ARE
STUNTED IN SOME COMMUNITIES,
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. ECONOMY
SUFFERED MORE IN THE FIRST
QUARTER THAN FIRST BELIEVED.
THE GOVERNMENT SAID TODAY IT
SHRANK AT AN ANNUAL RATE OF
ALMOST 3%, DUE MAINLY TO WINTER
STORMS AND FALLING HEALTH CARE
SPENDING.
MORE RECENT DATA SUGGEST A
REBOUND SINCE THEN.
WALL STREET MOSTLY SHRUGGED OFF
THE REPORT.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 49 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,867.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 29 POINTS, TO
4,379.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 ADDED 9, TO
FINISH AT 1,959.
>> Ifill: THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL
LEAGUE AGREED TODAY TO REMOVE A
CAP ON PAY-OUTS TO FORMER
PLAYERS WITH CONCUSSION-RELATED
PROBLEMS.
A FEDERAL JUDGE HAD SUGGESTED
THE OVERALL CAP OF $675 MILLION
WAS NOT ENOUGH TO COVER AS MANY
AS 20,000 RETIREES.
THE SETTLEMENT IS MEANT TO LAST
AT LEAST 65 YEARS, FOR FORMER
PLAYERS WITH LOU GEHRIG'S
DISEASE, DEMENTIA AND OTHER
CONDITIONS.
>> Woodruff: REPUBLICANS IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ARE GOING TO FEDERAL COURT WITH
A LAWSUIT CHARGING PRESIDENT
OBAMA HAS ABUSED HIS POWERS.
SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER ANNOUNCED
THE MOVE TODAY.
HE GAVE NO DETAILS OF THE
SPECIFIC LEGAL CLAIMS, BUT SAID
THE GOAL IS TO PROTECT THE
RIGHTS OF CONGRESS.
>> WHAT WE'VE SEEN CLEARLY OVER
THE LAST FIVE YEARS IS AN EFFORT
TO ERODE THE POWER OF THE
LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.
AND I BELIEVE THE PRESIDENT IS
NOT FAITHFULLY EXECUTING THE
LAWS OF OUR COUNTRY, AND ON
BEHALF OF THE INSTITUTION AND
OUR CONSTITUTION, STANDING UP
AND FIGHTING FOR THIS IS IN THE
BEST LONG-TERM INTEREST OF THE
CONGRESS.
>> Woodruff: REPUBLICANS HAVE
ACCUSED THE PRESIDENT OF
UNILATERALLY CHANGING HEALTH
CARE AND IMMIGRATION LAWS.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAID TODAY THAT
CONGRESSIONAL OBSTRUCTION HAS
FORCED MR. OBAMA TO MAKE GREATER
USE OF EXECUTIVE ORDERS.
>> Ifill: SUPPORTERS OF GAY
MARRIAGE WON TWO NEW LEGAL
VICTORIES TODAY.
A FEDERAL APPEALS COURT IN
DENVER UPHELD A LOWER COURT
RULING AGAINST UTAH'S BAN ON
SAME-SEX UNIONS.
THE STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL
IMMEDIATELY PROMISED TO APPEAL.
AND, A SEPARATE FEDERAL COURT
STRUCK DOWN INDIANA'S BAN ON GAY
MARRIAGE.
>> Woodruff: THE ROMAN CATHOLIC
ARCHDIOCESE OF SEATTLE IS THE
LATEST TO SETTLE CLAIMS THAT
PRIESTS SEXUALLY ABUSED
CHILDREN.
THE CHURCH HAS AGREED TO PAY $12
MILLION TO 30 MEN WHO SAY THEY
WERE ASSAULTED, AS CHILDREN, AT
TWO CATHOLIC SCHOOLS.
IT HAPPENED BETWEEN THE 1950'S
AND THE 1980'S.
>> Ifill: IN IRAQ, PRIME
MINISTER NOURI AL-MALIKI CALLED
FOR ALL FACTIONS TO UNITE
AGAINST A SUNNI INSURGENCY.
BUT, HE REJECTED APPEALS, FROM
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND OTHERS, TO
FORM A UNITY GOVERNMENT.
MALIKI INSISTED TODAY ANY SUCH
MOVE WOULD AMOUNT TO A COUP,
SINCE HIS SHIITE BLOC WON THE
MOST SEATS IN APRIL'S ELECTIONS.
>> ( translated ): IT IS NOT A
SECRET TO IRAQIS, THE GRAVE
INTENTIONS HARBORED BEHIND THE
CALL FOR THE FORMATION OF A SO-
CALLED GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL
SALVATION.
IT IS AN ATTEMPT TO ELIMINATE
OUR YOUNG DEMOCRACY AND TO
IGNORE VOTERS' OPINIONS.
THE CALL TO FORM A GOVERNMENT OF
NATIONAL SALVATION WOULD TORPEDO
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE
POLITICAL PROCESS.
>> Ifill: MEANWHILE, SECRETARY
OF STATE JOHN KERRY WARNED
IRAQ'S NEIGHBORS AGAINST
INTERVENING.
ON TUESDAY, SYRIAN WARPLANES
BOMBED AN IRAQI BORDER TOWN
SEIZED BY THE SUNNI EXTREMIST
GROUP ISIL.
THAT SAME FACTION IS ALSO
FIGHTING IN SYRIA.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY KERRY
ALSO CALLED TODAY FOR RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN TO SHOW
HE'S SERIOUS ABOUT FOSTERING
PEACE IN UKRAINE.
EARLIER, THE RUSSIAN PARLIAMENT
CANCELED A RESOLUTION
AUTHORIZING MILITARY FORCE TO
SUPPORT UKRAINIAN REBELS.
BUT IN BRUSSELS, KERRY SAID
PUTIN NEEDS TO DO MORE, IF HE
WANTS TO AVOID TOUGHER ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS.
>> WE ARE DELIGHTED THAT
PRESIDENT PUTIN PUT TO THE DUMA
THE RETRACTION OF THAT LAW WHICH
EMPOWERED RUSSIA TO TAKE ACTION
IN UKRAINE.
THAT'S IMPORTANT.
IT'S A GREAT STEP.
BUT IT COULD BE REVERSED IN TEN
MINUTES, AND EVERYONE KNOWS
THAT.
>> Woodruff: RUSSIA DENIES IT IS
LETTING FIGHTERS AND HEAVY
WEAPONS CROSS INTO UKRAINE, OR
THAT IT IS AGAIN MASSING TROOPS
NEAR THE BORDER.
>> Ifill: LIBYA HELD
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS TODAY
DESPITE GROWING CHAOS, THREE
YEARS AFTER THE OUSTER OF
MOAMMAR GADHAFI.
TURNOUT WAS SPARSE, BUT TROOPS
DEPLOYED TO PROTECT POLLING
STATIONS FROM POSSIBLE ATTACKS.
AT LEAST TWO CITIES CLOSED THEIR
POLLS ENTIRELY.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR:
THE SUPREME COURT MAKES TWO KEY
RULINGS FOR THE DIGITAL AGE;
A GOOD SHOWING FOR INCUMBENTS IN
LAST NIGHT'S PRIMARIES;
GWEN'S EXTENDED INTERVIEW WITH
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
HILLARY CLINTON;
SAVING CHILDREN IN GUATEMALA
FROM MALNUTRITION;
AND MY DISCUSSION WITH FORMER
TREASURY SECRETARY HANK PAULSON
ON THE COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> Ifill: IN TWO CLOSELY-WATCHED
TECHNOLOGY CASES, THE SUPREME
COURT PLACED LIMITS ON LAW
ENFORCEMENT, AND ON STREAMING
VIDEO SERVICES.
IN A UNANIMOUS DECISION, THE
COURT DECIDED POLICE OFFICERS
NEED A WARRANT TO SEARCH CELL
PHONES.
AND SEPARATELY, SIX OF THE NINE
JUSTICES SIDED WITH BROADCAST
NETWORKS AGAINST AN INTERNET
STARTUP THAT SOUGHT TO SHARE
THEIR SIGNALS WITHOUT PAYING A
FEE.
FOR MORE ON TODAY'S DECISIONS,
WE TURN AS ALWAYS TO MARCIA
COYLE OF THE NATIONAL LAW
JOURNAL.
ST CASE, MARCIA SOUNDS
LIKE WHEN IS A CELL PHONE NOT A
CELL PHONE.
>> IT IS A FASCINATING CASE, A
STRAIGHTFORWARD DECISION BY THE
CHIEF JUSTICE.
ACTUALLY, IT WAS TWO QUICK
CASES, ONE FROM BROXTON AND ONE
FROM CALIFORNIA.
THE CELL PHONE OWNERS HAD BEEN
LAWFULLY ARRESTED ONE FOR
CONCEALED WEAPONS AND
GANG-RELATED ACTIVITY, THE OTHER
FOR DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY.
ONE CELL PHONE OWNER HAD A
Smartphone, THE OTHER HAD THE
OLDER CLIP PHONE.
AS YOU KNOW AND WE TALKED ABOUT,
A SEARCH IS REASONABLE UNDER THE
FOURTH AMENDMENT GENERALLY IF
POLICE HAVE A WARRANT, BUT THERE
ARE EXCEPTIONS TO THE WARRANT
REQUIREMENT THAT THE COURT HAS
RECOGNIZED OVER THE YEARS AND
ONE OF THE EXCEPTIONS PLAYED OUT
IN THE CASE TODAY.
POLICE CAN SEARCH YOU AFTER
YOU'VE BEEN ARRESTED, GENERALLY
FOR TWO REASONS -- ONE, TO LOOK
FOR ANY WEAPONS THAT MIGHT
ENDANGER THE OFFICER OR THE
PUBLIC AND ALSO TO PRESERVE
POSSIBLE DESTRUCTION OF
EVIDENCE, PRESERVE EVIDENCE THAT
MIGHT BE DESTROYED.
SORRY ABOUT THAT.
AND THE CHIEF JUSTICE TODAY FOR
THE ENTIRE COURT SAID THAT
SUSPENSION DOES NOT APPLY TO
CELL PHONES.
>> Ifill: THE COLORFUL WRITING
OF CHIEF ROBERTS BEING BLUNT AND
THE YIEW UNANIMITY STRUCK ME.
>> THE COURT SPLIT ON THE FOURTH
AMENDMENT IN WARRANT
REQUIREMENTS IN THE GPS CASE NOT
TOO LONG AGO AND THEY SOMETIMES
HAVE VERY UNUSUAL COALITIONS
WHEN THEY DIVIDE ON FOURTH
AMENDMENT QUESTIONS.
BUT ON THIS CASE, SEEMS LIKE IT
WASN'T HARD FOR THEM, GENERALLY
BECAUSE OF, AS THE CHIEF JUSTICE
EXPLAINED, THE AMOUNT OF
INFORMATION THAT CELL PHONES
CONTAIN TODAY.
HE WENT INTO GREAT LENGTHS
DESCRIBING WHAT WE KEEP ON OUR
CELL PHONES TODAY.
IN FACT, HE SAID, A SEARCH OF A
CELL PHONE IS A MORE SIGNIFICANT
INVASION THAN A SEARCH OF YOUR
HOME IN TERMS OF WHAT YOU CAN
FIND.
HE MADE A FUNNY COMMENT AT THE
BEGINNING OF HIS OPINION SAYING
THAT CELL PHONES HAVE BECOME IS
SUCH A PERVASIVE AND INSISTENT
PART OF OUR DAILY LIVES THAT A
MARTIAN WHO CAME TO THE UNITED
STATES MIGHT THINK IT'S PART OF
THE ANATOMY.
>> Ifill: SO, TELL ME, GETTING
A WARRANT IS ALL THAT THE
REQUIRED FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT TO
GET ACCESSO THE PHONES, AND THE
COURT SAID THAT THE THE COST OF
DOING BUSINESS.
>> YES, HE SAID PRIVACY HAS A
COST AND HE NOTED THIS WILL HAVE
AN IMPACT ON LAW ENFORCEMENT'S
ABILITY TO FIGHT CRIME, BUT DID
THINK THE GOVERNMENT'S
COUNTERARGUMENTS HERE JUST
DIDN'T OUTWEIGH THE PRIVACY
INTERESTS.
HE SAYS LAW ENFORCEMENT HAS
TECHNOLOGICAL TOOLS THAT IT CAN
USE, FOR EXAMPLE, IF SOMEBODY
LOCKS THE CELL